1 | P a g e  
 Doing Theology in a Garbage Dump 
The Rough Grounds and Theological Method  
    
    
DD DDaa aann nnii iiee eell ll    FF FFrr rraa aann nnkk kkll llii iinn nn    EE EE.. ..    PP PPii iill llaa aarr rrii iioo oo,, ,,    CC CC.. ..MM MM.. ..    
 
 
 
1. The Rough Grounds of Payatas 1. The Rough Grounds of Payatas 1. The Rough Grounds of Payatas 1. The Rough Grounds of Payatas and Elsewhere and Elsewhere and Elsewhere and Elsewhere    
 
 The sub-title  written on the flyer for this talk reads "the rough grounds and 
theological method". Let me first share with you th e grounds from where I stand. I am a 
professor of theology. For the most part of any  we ek, I teach seminarians, sisters and lay 
people, check papers, do research, etc. But on week ends, I help my Vincentian confreres in 
their parish in Payatas, the biggest garbage dump i n Manila. I have been assisting there for 
around 12 years now. At first, I was invited there to help in giving pastoral care - celebrate 
Masses or bless the dead, give seminars, meet peopl e. Later, I began to realize that it was  not 
mainly I who was helping. It was in fact they who w ere helping me make sense of my 
theology. But that is going ahead of the story.  
 No actual census has been done in Payatas, but est imates give you around 40-45 
thousand people living around a 16-hectare dumpsite  facility.At any given Sunday Mass, no 
one can tell if someone is a scavenger or not. But it is said  that there are around 10,000 
people working in shifts in the dumpsite facility. On an ordinary day, for instance, a scavenger 
may  home with 7-10 dollars in his pocket. If one i s lucky and finds a gold necklace among the 
refuse, one can sell it  for 30-40 dollars! But of course that happens perhaps only once in a 
lifetime. When the Vincentians first came to Payata s  25 years ago,  the roads were not 
paved. It was muddy all over; the stink of the garb age penetrated one’sskin;flies were 
swarming all over the place. Today, the situation i s much better, although flies still abound! 
Aside from doing traditional parish work, the Vince ntians also administer many other social 
services such as child-learning centers, programs f or the elderly, savings mobilization, 
community health services, savings and housing prog rams, cooperatives and many others.  
 There was one program I fondly remember: we once h ad a water facility and a very 
small swimming pool for children next to the garbag e heap. Here, mothers could leave their 
children while they did  chores and young boys and girls could take showers after spending 
the  day in the dump. After some time, the garbage company decided to expand the heap; 
and the swimming pool was sadly the first to go. Ju st last year, the chapel where we celebrate 2 | P a g e  
 Sunday Masses also had to go along with hundreds of  shanties around it. People are being 
forced to give way to the garbage.  
After Sunday Masses, people would often invite me t o their small houses for simple 
celebrations - be it birthday parties or wedding an niversaries. But at times I would  also be 
asked to bless their dead, some of them very beauti ful children  in makeshift cardboard 
coffins who have died of diarrhea or respiratory ai lments - illnesses otherwise curable with 
minimum medical intervention.  
 The Payatas situation may be of interest to people  in various fields, e.g., quality 
pastoral intervention, community organizing, ecolog ical sustainability, urban planning, etc. 
But for a theologian like me who shuttles between t he dumpsite and the classroom, I am led 
to ask the question: "How do these rough grounds af fect the way that I do theology?" For 
instance, how do the questions and the painful live s of these people affect the way I think 
about God, salvation, morality, etc? Far from being  abstract, thesequestions often spell life 
and death for millions of people in the margins. An d I am not only talking of Payatas, but of  
3.8 billion people (half of the world's population)  who live on 2.5 dollars a day as of the latest 
UN survey.  If the Church still wants to walk the w ay of Jesus, it needs to listen to them 
because their lives alone already pose painful ques tions to the kind of salvation Jesus brings. 
That is why this quote from Ludwig Wittgenstein com es in handy: 
  
We have got onto slippery ice where there is no fri ction and so in a certain sense 
the conditions are ideal, but also just because of that, we are unable to walk. We 
want to walk, so we need friction. Back to the roug h ground!  (Philosophical 
Investigations)  
 
Though Wittgenstein was referring to the crystallin e purity of logic that does not work 
in real life, I am transposing its relevance to the ology. The academe (which is the location for 
many of us) and our theories do not display real fr iction with actual life and death 
consequences. We can dissect issues from left to ri ght, from top to bottom or vice versa and 
debate endlessly. Many of these do not work in the rough grounds like Payatas. We want to 
walk. So, "back to the rough ground," Wittgenstein reminds us, because their rough lives 
pose "painful questions" to the way that we do theo logy and ministry. 
 
2. 2. 2. 2. Their Lives as Their Lives as Their Lives as Their Lives as Painful Questions Painful Questions Painful Questions Painful Questions    
 
 Let me mention some questions which  Payatas has b rought about. First, there was a 
big debate in the Synod about communion for divorce d and remarried Catholics. In the end, 3 | P a g e  
 it did not also get the needed votes. But from the perspective of Payatas, one actually 
wonders what the big issue is. I remember the leade rs of our BECs in those areas. Most of 
them only had civil marriages because a church marr iage is too expensive and the 
requirements onerous. Since we do not have a divorc e law in the Philippines, some who had 
been previously married  will never be able to marr y their present partners at all. They are 
cohabitating not because they want to know whether they are compatible or not (as is 
sometimes in the First World countries), but becaus e they have no choice. These are 
committed couples. They have responsibly taken care  of their children; some of them are 
grandparents by now. "Gradualness" may be a good th ing and is presently being 
contemplated by progressive theologians. But is it in their intention -  a movement from civil 
to church marriage? Or a planned progress from coha bitation to the Sacrament? No. Not 
even. For many people on the ground, cohabitation i s all that they have because  other 
avenues are closed to them. As if the pain of survi val is not heavy enough, the Church still 
reinforces guilt on the consciences of these otherw ise faithful couples by restricting their 
participation in Church ministries or prohibiting c ommunion. To be honest, for many of the 
couples that I know, they do not bother themselves about this anymore. And they keep 
serving the Church or going to communion. They did not tell me about their 'irregular' 
situations. I also did not ask. They often say, "If  the Church does not accept my situation, I 
hope God understands me." I do ask myself: is this the kind of callous Church that I want to 
serve?  
  Let us take another area: liturgy. In a recent ar ticle that I wrote, I tried to analyze the 
direction of Magisterium's document on the liturgy from 1980s up to our times. What I see 
are three recognizable directions: the emphasis on "sacrifice", liturgical centralization and 
"Eucharistic amazement". To give us some examples o f their concerns, some of them 
bordering on the ridiculous: preference for the Lat in language and Gregorian chant, the 
reverential silence in the Mass, Eucharistic adorat ions, details of how to wear the stoles and 
chasubles, what type of chalices to use. It has alw ays bothered me how such a preoccupation 
with  these encyclicals can fit into the Masses we celebrate in Payatas - when the noise of 
dump trucks and bulldozers competes with the singin g of the children's choir, or the blessing 
during the epiclesis  also doubles as a gesture for driving the flies aw ay to prevent them from 
diving into the chalice (sometimes successfully, at  other times not!), etc.  Thus, people on the 
ground could not really care less about a recent cr azy debate on the English translation of the 
Eucharist (on whether it is "The Lord be with you" or "with your spirit"). To invite Jesus "to 
enter under my roof" does not resonate at all for p eoples who have no roofs over their heads. 
What a real disconnect!  
 4 | P a g e  
 3. 3. 3. 3.        Closed Churches Closed Churches Closed Churches Closed Churches    
  
 Many people on the ground do not really have time for these debates. They can only 
hope that the Church is there for them when they ne ed it. If it is not there, they would look 
for God somewhere else - maybe in popular religions , Pentecostal groups or maybe in the 
garbage, who knows. In one of those big conferences  which we organized in the Philippines, 
we asked some leaders of these communities on what they can tell the bishops, priests, sisters 
and other leaders of the church. In summary, they s aid one simple thing: "please do not be 
too strict".  The poor feels that the Church is a r igid, legalistic and "closed" institution.  
 In another forum on sexually violated women, we in vited some survivors to be our 
resource persons. One of them shared her story: On the day she was raped, she ran to church  
hoping that someone was there to help. But it was c losed. So she ran to the cemetery instead. 
She read the tombstones and the RIP next to their n ames. Not knowing much English, she 
read "rip" and thought this must be "rape". "Oh my God, " she said, "they were  all raped and 
they are dead now. Thank you, Lord, I am still aliv e." At the end of her talk, what was 
impressed on us was a simple appeal: "Can you pleas e leave the Church open?" Listening to 
her, I thought: " What irony! She found God alive i n the cemetery because the Church is 
closed." She was talking about the physical church,  of course. But metaphorically speaking, 
the same closed mentalities do abound.  
 
4. Closed Theologies 4. Closed Theologies 4. Closed Theologies 4. Closed Theologies    
 
 My small contribution to this debate is to discern  this "closed outlook" in theological 
methods. If I am going to summarize what I would sa y, it is this: It is not only our churches and 
mentalities which are closed but also the way we do  theology. It is these closed methods that 
make the Church deaf both to people's voices and to  the whispers of the Spirit. In the end, we 
have a dead church - so closed and so dead that God  has decided to move to the cemetery. 
This calls for  a discussion on theological method,  an exercise that can be very technical and 
jargon-filled and which also makes people hate theo logy. Since this is a mixed audience, I will 
try my best to make this understandable for all. Fo r those interested in the wider debates and 
detailed arguments, I can refer you to some article s and books I have written on the topic.   
 In the theological field, I have tried to identify  two prominent  methods of doing 
theology that I think are  also representative of s ome others; one of them modern, the other 
postmodern. The first is radical orthodoxy; the sec ond is liberation theology. Much has been 
written on both subjects up to now. I am choosing t wo great authors who  have provided 
methodological reflection on their respective movem ents. The first is John Milbank, professor 5 | P a g e  
 at the University of Nottingham, who first came to prominence with his book Theology and 
Social Theory . The second author is Clodovis Boff, a Brazilian p riest of the Servite Order, 
whose methodological book Theology and Praxis is the one of the most comprehensive works 
on the method of liberation theology.   
 
    4 4 44.2 .2 .2 .2 Postmodern Theologies: Radical Orthodoxy Postmodern Theologies: Radical Orthodoxy Postmodern Theologies: Radical Orthodoxy Postmodern Theologies: Radical Orthodoxy    
  
 Milbank's work is considered "a tour de force of s ystematic theology" and cited by The 
Church Times as among the "100 Best Christian Books". Stanley Ha uerwas considered its 
second edition in 2006 "a bombshell" and Charles Ta ylor aligned his book A Secular Age 
(2007) with  Milbank's work and the radical orthodo xy movement. Very much ahead of his 
time, at least in the theological field, Milbank  w as one of the first to unmask the 
metanarrative of human and social sciences and advo cated its expulsion in theological 
discourse.  He crusaded against secular politics, c apitalist economy, sociology, dialectical 
philosophy and postmodernity in order to recover th e displaced Christendom. Milbank is a 
very erudite and prolific writer. It is impossible and unfair to summarize his work here. Let me 
just mention one objection to his method about whic h I wrote in an earlier work: his closed 
theological structure. Milbank's project was intend ed to retrieve theology from its captivity in 
the social and human sciences. He thinks that in mo dern times, theology has been 
"positioned"  or high-jacked by social theory. It s uffers from what he calls "false humility" by 
refusing to qualify, criticize or position other di scourses. Even as this is necessary, Milbank 
unfortunately  swings the pendulum to other side of  the spectrum. One of his critics describes 
his project as that of  "a hero in quest of a stole n crown."  
 
Once upon a time, it was theology that wore the cro wn, theology that carried 
out most of the fundamental reading of all other in terpretations and all other 
social formations... It was the master narrative. S tolen by secular reason, and 
worn as 'social theory', the master-narrative is no w sought by its earlier owner. 
(Gerard Loughlin)  
 
 Like all warriors and crusaders, Milbank has frien ds and enemies. On his side would be  
Augustine, Blondel, de Lubac, McIntyre and some oth ers. On the opposite  bank  are the 
thinkers in the secular sciences and philosophies, modern and postmodern, from Marx to 
Weber, from Foucault to Nietzsche, as well as theol ogies which use modern philosophies and 
social theories like that of Rahner and the liberat ion theologians. And as in all wars, the 
enemies are demonized. In the end, Milbank thinks w e do not need other sciences - social 
science, even philosophy or metaphysics - because t heology in itself suffices. In his hands, 6 | P a g e  
 theology has become a "closed science". Although  h is book is "Theology and Social Theory", 
what he actually means is: "Theology is a Social Th eory".  So if we have closed off our doors to 
dialogue with other sciences because "Christian the ology" is enough, how else can we listen 
to  voices other than our own - those of my friends  in Payatas and elsewhere? Not all of them 
are Catholics, nor even Christians. I had the privi lege of listening to Milbank himself in a 
conference when I was still a young PhD student man y years ago. In the open forum, I raised 
this question: "Sir, I come from the Philippines. I f Christian theology should be the only 
narrative that suffices, how will it look like to m y Muslim neighbors?" His response was short 
and dismissive: "Well, that is your problem, not mi ne," he said. I am sure he no longer 
remembers me nor my question. But the way he answer ed is quite reflective of his own 
exclusivist theological position.  
  
    4 4 44.2 Liberation Theologies: Clodovis Boff .2 Liberation Theologies: Clodovis Boff .2 Liberation Theologies: Clodovis Boff .2 Liberation Theologies: Clodovis Boff    
      
 One of Milbank's considered "opponents" is liberat ion theology's foremost 
methodological work Theology and Praxis by Clodovis Boff. Boff wrote this work as his 
dissertation at the Université Catholique du Louvai n, Belgium in 1976 - just about the time 
the first generation of liberation theologians (Gut ierrez, Assman, Segundo, Bonino) began to 
grapple with charges of the "ideologization of the faith". Ratzinger's document against 
liberation theology appeared in 1984 but the Intern ational Theological Commission (ITC) 
already started to study liberation theology in 197 4 -  about the time that Boff was writing his 
dissertation. We can thus understand Boff's concern : it was  to institute a theological method 
to protect liberation theology from the incursion o f ideologies.  
 Boff's work of almost 500 pages is very difficult to understand. But simply put, it was a 
technical elaboration of the "see-judge-act" proces s. For those among us familiar with Basic 
Christian Communities or the Young Christian Worker s movement, "see-judge-act" is a 
handy methodology with which to reflect on the Word  of God in context. These three 
questions are crucial: (1) What is our situation?; (2) What does God tell us about our 
situation?; and (3) What do we need to do to transf orm our situation? Thus, in the end, we 
have a practical theology that does not deal with a bstractions, but is really grounded in 
whatever the context is (for example, poverty, inju stice, oppression).  
 But it is precisely also this method's use of Marx ist analysis to analyze the situation that 
is vulnerable to ideological manipulation. We have heard of how many these communities 
had been  co-opted by Communist parties for  their own revolutionary agenda. This was  true 
in Latin America, but also in the Philippines, Indi a and elsewhere.  Thus, Boff  took great pains 
to veer his theological method away from this dange r.   How did he do it? By adopting mainly 7 | P a g e  
 the notion of 'practice' from a French philosopher,  Louis Althusser. This is how Althusser 
defines it: 
 
By practice in general I shall mean any process of transformation of a 
determinate given raw material into a determinate p roduct, a transformation 
effected by a determinate human labour, using deter minate means of 
production. In any practice thus conceived, the det erminant moment is neither 
the raw material not the product but the practice i n the narrow sense; the 
moment of the labour of transformation itself. (For Marx) 
 
 If we are going to transpose this Althusserian pri nciple into theological theory, it spells 
something like this: the result of social analysis from the ground serves as  "raw material"; the 
pastoral action shall serve as "product". But what is important is what the theologian does 
and uses in order to transform the raw materials in to the product. In Boff's technical 
language, it is the "content of Christian faith", i n short, revelation, doctrines, dogmas. To use 
a mechanical metaphor, it is this content that serv es as fuel to process the given "raw 
material" in order to come up with the "theological  product". Applying it to our concerns, the 
voices of peoples from the ground serve as the "raw  material". And, following Althusser, Boff 
believes  that the "raw material" is not very impor tant; neither is the resulting pastoral action. 
What is really important is the act - the "theologi cal production" done by the theologian. If 
you go back to the see-judge-act process, what is c rucial is the second movement: the act of 
judging by the theologian and the Christian princip les used.  
 I do not want to burden you with this technical la nguage but I feel it is necessary to 
resort to it in order to make some conclusions at t his point. In the end, Milbank and Boff - 
theologians who find themselves at opposite sides o f the ideological spectrum - in fact 
possess a common weakness. Both enthrone the "theol ogian" as the ultimate arbiter of 
theological meaning at the expense of voices from t he ground. In short, what is central to  
these famous theological methods is actually the th eologian and the theologian’s principles. 
(On the side, you can also include the Magisterium with their preoccupation with doctrine.) 
Boff needs to defend liberation theology from ideol ogical charges. So, he keeps  theological 
theory safe from the incursion of empirical voices.  Milbank, for his part, also feels compelled 
to protect Christian theology from the encroachment   of nihilist narratives of theory. Thus,  
the role of the theologian in this postmodern cacop hony of voices is to propose another 
narrative, poetically reinvent Christian meaning. T o quote Milbank, "this entire ecclesial task 
falls on him [the theologian]".   
 
  8 | P a g e  
 5. Reflexive Theologizing 5. Reflexive Theologizing 5. Reflexive Theologizing 5. Reflexive Theologizing    
 
 What is my alternative to get out of these difficu lties? In short, I call it "reflexive 
theologizing". Here I enlist the help of some think ers to give voice to people on the rough 
grounds. Let me mention three: Pierre Bourdieu, a F rench sociologist; Thomas Aquinas, the 
Dominican theologian; and Albert Einstein, the scie ntist. I was amazed at this convergence of 
sciences.  In a previous work, I took more than 200  pages to explain the sociological theory of 
Pierre Bourdieu and its implications on theology. I n order to summarize it, let me just quote 
one crucial paragraph from him to bring out my poin t.  
 
Science has a time which is not that of practice. F or the analyst, time disappears: 
not only because the analyst cannot have any uncert ainty as to what can 
happen, but also because he has time to totalize, t hat is, to overcome the effects 
of time. (The Logic of Practice) 
 
Here, Bourdieu compares the view of "science" (or t heory) and the view of "practice". 
Practice has a certain logic which is not accessibl e to science. Transposed to my problematic, 
people on the rough ground have  a certain logic wh ich is not accessible to the academic, the 
theologian included. Bourdieu talks about the "feel  for the game". To the person engaged in 
practice, to the player on the ground, the "sense o f time" is important - its tempo, its 
irreversibility, acceleration. Because the observer  - the analyst, the academici-  stands outside 
of the game, he does not really feel its urgency, i ts time.  
In order to make this clearer, let us look at the p henomenon of "gift-giving". 
Anthropologists have shown us  that ancient societi es were engaged in endless gift-
exchanges. These societies lived and thrived on gif t-exchange: products, pearls, even inter-
marriages. When a gift is given, a counter-gift aut omatically comes. This is what 
anthropologists call "cycles of reciprocity". But f or Bourdieu, this synchronized view is an 
observer's view, a view from above, a view from an outsider. When I was doing my PhD, I was 
living in a building with other students on campus.  One day, my neighbor shared with me a 
meal which she had just cooked. A few hours later, I knocked on her door and also shared 
what I had prepared that night. She got  upset, and  asked me why I had to return the favor 
right away. The rush with which I accomplished my o wn gift-giving invalidated her gift, and   
made it look like I was paying for it. Thus, the ti me  between giving  and reciprocating  is 
crucial to the character of gift-exchange because i f one does it too soon,  it nullifies the gift. 
This knowledge is only known to the players of the gift-exchange economy, not to outsiders.  
Let us go to Albert Einstein. In a 1921 lecture ent itled "Geometry and Reality", he told 
the scientist-members of the Prussian Academy of Sc iences: "As far as the laws of 9 | P a g e  
 mathematics refer to reality, they are not certain;  and as far as they are certain, they do not 
refer to reality." Even mathematics which has gaine d a reputation for being the most exact 
science can never fully represent actual life. I do  not really understand Einstein that much but 
what this says is that the mathematician, scientist , philosopher or theologian (and all 
academics for that matter) can never really underst and the experience of the man and 
woman on the street. For, in the words of Bourdieu,  academics are infected with what he calls 
the "scholastic point of view" - a certain disposit ion which is a product of leisurely universes 
where people can "seriously play" or busily experim ent with thought, freed as they are from 
the uncertainty and urgency about tomorrow because their 'state of life' (or, in some 
countries, the State treasury) provides for them. A s you well know, skholè  (from which school 
comes from) is the Greek word for leisure - a locat ion which takes us away from the world of 
practice. 
 
What does this mean for theology? Let me mention tw o concrete repercussions: (a) 
the theological reflexivity; and (a) the role of pr axis in theological method. 
 
5.1 5.1 5.1 5.1 Theological Reflexivity Theological Reflexivity Theological Reflexivity Theological Reflexivity    
 
If theory could not fully comprehend praxis, the fi rst act of any theology is to 
acknowledge the limits of its language. Theology th erefore needs to be "modest" and should 
bow to the experiences of people from the ground. T his is what I call "reflexive theologizing". 
Reflexivity has been around the academic field for some time now. Bourdieu's contribution, 
however, is to unmask the fallacies coming from our  belonging to leisurely world of the 
skholè (of which the academic field is just one example). In concrete, Bourdieu's framework 
alerts us to the fact that the bishop, the pastor, the theologian, the pastoral worker or the 
community organizer can never really comprehend the  experiences of people on the ground. 
The life and death stakes of the poor are absent in  their leisurely scholastic world, the world 
of the observer. At the end of the day, we go back to our well-heated homes and sturdy 
buildings, to our air-conditioned classrooms and li braries, while these people have to worry 
all night if their roofs (if they have any) will st ill be there when they wake up. To realize this is 
to step back and tell ourselves that not one of us can have  the last word. That is "theological 
reflexivity". Some call it "humility"; others call it "theological modesty". But beyond being a 
personal virtue or desirable attitude (e.g., that t he academic should be modest or humble), 
reflexivity is a structure rooted in the sociologic al and epistemological dimensions of our 
being human. This means that in order to be true to  our humanity, there is no other way but 
to be reflexive.  10 | P a g e  
 This brings me to Thomas Aquinas, the theologian. A ll in all, Aquinas has produced 
approximately 80 philosophical and theological work s, 85 sermons and others. But at the end 
of his life, he hung up his instruments and stopped  writing or dictating anything. Brother 
Reginald who was his assistant asked him why: "Regi nald, I cannot, because all that I have 
written seems like straw to me." There are many int erpretations of  this event in the life of 
Aquinas, but from the perspective of what I am sayi ng here, Thomas seems to realize that 
theology is just like "straw" in the face of the Di vine, in front of the Real. The event points to 
the limits of theological language, of all our scie ntific language, for the matter. This brings 
me to my next point.  
 
5. 5. 5. 5.2. 2. 2. 2.    Ro Ro Ro Role of Praxis le of Praxis le of Praxis le of Praxis in in in in    Theological Method Theological Method Theological Method Theological Method    
 
If theological theory is limited, we therefore need  to open up our method - not only to 
the working of the Spirit, but also to the voices o f praxis from the rough grounds. For us in 
Vincentian institutions, this is not a difficult co nclusion to make because, like Vincent de 
Paul, we know that God speaks from the rough ground s of the poor's lives. For a Vincentian, 
and for any Christian for that matter, this is the privileged location of God's presence. I would 
like to argue that the voices, sentiments, reflecti ons and praxis from the rough grounds are 
necessary to develop, change, modify or subvert the  way we have formulated our doctrines, 
dogmas and beliefs.  
This is not a new thing. The Church has always reco gnized the sensus fidelium. But 
when a doctrine is challenged by voices from the gr ound, the Magisterium and theologians 
alike close their doors and say, the Church is not "a democracy" or doctrine is not about 
statistics, etc. Though I agree that there is somet hing greater about the faith than the results 
of opinion surveys, these excuses are also used by those in power as alibis not to listen. This 
explains why I feel ambivalent about the developmen ts of the recent Synod in Rome. On the 
one hand, all of them agreed that there is a need " to develop a different type of theology in 
which we can learn from the lived experience of fam ilies and the difficulties they are going 
through". On the other hand, they are also saying: "we do not intend to change the doctrine; 
we are only applying it to people".  
 Perhaps my humble  proposal can help a  bit in sor ting out where this ambivalence is 
coming from. And, in order not to pay mere lip serv ice to sensus  fidelium , viable processes 
need to be set up for the church to deeply listen t o the faithful. The recent document on 
Sensus Fidei  (2014) contemplates on why majority of the faithfu l remain indifferent to some 
doctrinal or moral injunctions issued by the Magist erium. There are two possible reasons: 
weakness on the part of the faithful and lack of co nsultation. 11 | P a g e  
  
This lack of reception may indicate a weakness or l ack of faith on the part of 
the people of God... But in some cases it may indic ate that certain decisions 
have been taken by those in authority without due c onsideration of the 
experience of the faithful, or without sufficient c onsultation of the faithful by 
the Magisterium. ( Sensus Fidei, 123) 
 
The document thus identifies some structures to mak e this consultation happen, e.g., 
diocesan synods, parish councils. But even as these  structures are made to work properly in 
diocesan and parish levels,  the members of these b odies are in fact participated in by people 
of the skholé and headed by the Magisterium. I have painstakingly  searched throughout the 
document where the poor - those coming from the rou gh grounds of Payatas and elsewhere - 
can participate and be heard. It makes me sad becau se there is no such mention. Yet it is they 
to whom the psalm refers and to which we acclaim in  our liturgies: "The Lord hears the cry of 
the poor" (Psalm 34).  
 
6. 6. 6. 6. By Way of By Way of By Way of By Way of Conclusion Conclusion Conclusion Conclusion    
 
 I would like to conclude with the image used in th e flyer  for this lecture. It portrays 
the scavengers sorting out their "catch" for the da y - washing the plastic materials one by 
one, drying the paper and cardboard pieces, piling them up, weighing them so they can get 
paid by the junkshop owner at  day’s end. The lady in violet is a young Indonesian nun who 
was one of my theology students. In these immersion  programs, I usually tell my scavenger 
friends to teach our students  how they work and li ve. Just that. At the end of one such 
working  day, my scavenger friend shared with me wh at he jokingly told the young nun: 
"Sister, you are now good at the work that we do.  Should you decide not to pursue your 
vocation, you can come back here. You’re hired!"  
 I thought his joke can also offer a perspective on   how theology should be done today. 
The "rough grounds" are not afraid to ask painful q uestions. And their questions should make 
us rethink our theologies, revise our options and a lter our lives.    
 
 
Daniel Franklin Daniel Franklin Daniel Franklin Daniel Franklin E. E. E. E. Pilario, C.M. Pilario, C.M. Pilario, C.M. Pilario, C.M.    
St. Vincent School of St. Vincent School of St. Vincent School of St. Vincent School of Theology Theology Theology Theology    
Adamson University Adamson University Adamson University Adamson University    
221 Tandang Sora Ave 221 Tandang Sora Ave 221 Tandang Sora Ave 221 Tandang Sora Aven n nnue ue ue ue    
Quezon City, Philippines Quezon City, Philippines Quezon City, Philippines Quezon City, Philippines    
dd ddaa aann nnii iiee eell llff ffrr rraa aann nnkk kkll llii iinn nnpp ppii iill llaa aarr rrii iioo oo@@ @@yy yyaa aahh hhoo oooo oo.. ..cc ccoo oomm mm Lecture  at the Center for World Cathol Lecture  at the Center for World Cathol Lecture  at the Center for World Cathol Lecture  at the Center for World Catholi i iicism cism cism cism     
and Intercultural Theology (CWCIT) and Intercultural Theology (CWCIT) and Intercultural Theology (CWCIT) and Intercultural Theology (CWCIT)     
De Paul University, Chicago De Paul University, Chicago De Paul University, Chicago De Paul University, Chicago     
23 October 2014 23 October 2014 23 October 2014 23 October 2014  
 